---
title: Scheduling Jobs for Maximum Efficiency - Part 3
date: 2021-02-03
draft: false
tag: mathematical-planning, fsharp, production-scheduling, operations-research
---

I've continued to consult with my friend on the job assignments problem that I have been discussing in [post 1](/blog/2021/01/2021-01-25/), [post 2](/blog/2021/01/2021-01-28/). At first he was excited about what we had come up with but I knew there were likely more complexities that had not been uncovered yet. He went back to the client and came away with some new information. We were chatting and he told me, "Mathew, it turns out that machines have limited capacity. We have to limit how much work is assigned to them."

I knew this was likely the case from the beginning but I don't like to add any more complexity than is required to a solution. I tell me friend that it is no problem to add constraints to the model which limit how much work is assigned to a machine. Let me walk you through how I update the model we created in [post 1](/blog/2021/01/2021-01-25/) and [post 2](/blog/2021/01/2021-01-28/) to take this new limitation into consideration.

> **Note**: The full code for this post can be found 

## Machine Capacity Constraints

It is actually easy to add constraints on how much work we assign to a machine. The first thing we need to know is how much capcity they have. My friend told me that they are limited to 24 hours worth of work. Our job size is in units of hours so this is relatively easy. Let's create a constraint for each machine which states that the total loading cannot exceed this amount.

```fsharp
// Limit on how much work a machine can be assigned
let maxMachineCapacity = 24.0

// Machines have a limited capacity
let maxMachineCapacityConstraints =
    ConstraintBuilder "MachineCapacity" {
        for machine in machines ->
            sum (assignments.[machine, All, All] .* jobSizes) <== maxMachineCapacity
    }
```

Remember, `machines` is the list of machines available for us to assign work to. We are looping through each machine and creating a constraint which says the sum of the work assigned to the machine cannot exceed the max capacity, `maxMachineCapacity`. Remember, `assignments` is a `SliceMap` indexed by machine, job-type, and job where the value is a Boolean decision. `1` indicates that we are assigning the job to the machine and `0` indicates that we are not. The notation `assignments.[machine, All, All]` is a "slice" which says, "Give me all the assignements for this `machine` for all job-type and all jobs." We multiply this decision by the size of the job using the [Hadamard Product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadamard_product_(matrices)) `.*`.

Now that we have created some capacity constraints for the machines, let's add them to our model and try to solve.

```fsharp
// Compose the model
let model =
    Model.addObjective minSetupsObjective
    |> Model.addConstraints maxWorkConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints minWorkConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraint maxWorkDifferenceConstraint
    |> Model.addConstraints setupConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints jobsAssignmentConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints maxJobTypeDConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints maxMachineCapacityConstraints

// Give the solver plenty of time to find a solution
let settings = { Settings.basic with MaxDuration = 60_000L }

let result = Solver.solve settings model
```

We've cleaned up some of our code. All of the solving is now abstracted behind the `Scheduler.schedule` function. It returns a new type if the solver is able to find a solution, `MachineAssignments`. This type contains a list of the machines we can assign jobs to and the jobs that are assigned to it.

```fsharp
type MachineAssignment = {
    Machine : Machine
    Jobs : Job list
}

type MachineAssignments = MachineAssignments of MachineAssignment list
```

We now call `Scheduler.schedule` to see if we can find a plan which fits our requirements.

```fsharp
let scheduleResult = 
    Scheduler.schedule maxWorkDifference maxJobTypeDPercentage maxMachineCapacity jobs machines
```

We would like to have the script print out some nice output. We have also created a function, `Printer.MachineAssignments.print`, which provides nice clean output if we are able to solve the problem. Let's call this function in the case that our solver succesfully solved.

```fsharp
match scheduleResult with
| Result.Ok assignments -> Printer.MachineAssignments.print assignments
| Result.Error msg -> printfn $"{msg}"
```

What do we get?

```terminal
> match scheduleResult with
- | Result.Ok assignments -> Printer.MachineAssignments.print assignments
- | Result.Error msg -> printfn $"{msg}";;
Unable to solve
val it : unit = ()
```

## When the Solver Fails

The solver was not able to find a solution. It is reporting "Unable to solve". How can this be? We were able to solve this problem before. What has changed? Let's think about it. We have added constraints which state that a machine cannot be overloaded. Overloaded in this case means anything over `24.0`. Previously we were loading the machines up to `32.0`. We need to introduce a new concept to our vocabulary, "Infeasible". [Infeasible](https://www.dictionary.com/browse/feasible) is a term you will find frequently in the optimization literature. In this context what it means is that there is no solution to the problem. Our problem is overly constrained. What other constraints combined with our new machine capacity constraints could be causing this situation?

I'll give you a hint, it's the machine assignment constraints. Previously we defined a set of constraints, `jobsAssignmentConstraints`, which stated that every job must be assigned to at least one machine. In this new world though, that is not longer possible. There is simply too much work for the machines to handle. This is why the solver cannot find a solution. This is when we need to go back to the business and have a discussion about priorities. What is truly the most important thing.

In this scenario, I was able to discuss the problem with my friend. We agreed that the first priority would be to fully utilize the machines. After that, we want to minimize the number of different jobs that a machine processed. This is an example of [multi-objective optimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-objective_optimization). The idea is that we have a top priority that we want to optimize for. In this case, we want to maximize the loading of the machines. After we have maximized the loading of the machines, we would like to minimize the number of different job-types that a machines process. Fortunately, this is simple to express with `Flips`. We add the objectives to the model in the order we want it to optimize for.

## Mult-Objective Formulation

We need to create a new objective for maximizing the loading of machines. Let's do that by first creating an expression which evaluates the total machine loading.

```fsharp
// Maximize Utilization expression
let maxUtilizationExpression = sum (assignments .* jobSizes) 
```

The `maxUtilizationExpression` expression evaluates just how much we we have assigned to all machines. We can use this to create an objective.

```fsharp
let maxUtilizationObjective =
    Objective.create "MaxUtilization" Maximize maxUtilizationExpression
```

This new objective states that we would like to maximize the loading of the machines. We will use this new objetive as the first objective of our model. We will also no omit the `jobsAssignmentConstraints` that existed before since we no longer anticipate being able to assign all of the jobs to machines. Let's compose our new model.

```fsharp
// Compose the model
let model =
    Model.create maxUtilizationObjective
    |> Model.addObjective minSetupsObjective
    |> Model.addConstraints maxWorkConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints minWorkConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraint maxWorkDifferenceConstraint
    |> Model.addConstraints setupConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints maxJobTypeDConstraints
    |> Model.addConstraints maxMachineCapacityConstraints
```

Note that we create the initial model using the `maxUtilizationObjective` objective then add the `minSetupsObjective`. This means that the solver will find a solution which maximizes the machine utilization first and then search for a solution that minimizes the number of different job-types. Let's try to solve this and see what we get. This code comes from the `Scheduler.schedule` function. If the solver is successful, it returns a `Result.Ok` with the machine assignments. If it fails to find a solution, it returns a `Result.Error` with "Unable to solve" as the message.

```fsharp
// Give the solver plenty of time to find a solution
let settings = { Settings.basic with MaxDuration = 60_000L }

let result = Solver.solve settings model

match result with
| Optimal solution -> 
    getMachineAssignments solution assignments
    |> MachineAssignments
    |> Result.Ok
| _ -> Result.Error "Unable to solve"
```

If we use our pretty printer function we get the following.

```fsharp
let scheduleResult = 
    Scheduler.schedule maxWorkDifference maxJobTypeDPercentage maxMachineCapacity jobs machines

match scheduleResult with
| Result.Ok assignments -> Printer.MachineAssignments.print assignments
| Result.Error msg -> printfn $"{msg}"
```

```terminal
Machine Loading:
┌─────────┬────────────┬─────────────────────┬────────────────────┐
│ Machine │ Total Work │ Percent Type D Work │ Distinct Job Count │
├─────────┼────────────┼─────────────────────┼────────────────────┤
│ 1       │ 24         │ 0.00%               │ 1                  │
│ 2       │ 24         │ 0.00%               │ 1                  │
│ 3       │ 24         │ 0.00%               │ 1                  │
│ 4       │ 24         │ 0.00%               │ 1                  │
│ 5       │ 24         │ 0.00%               │ 1                  │
└─────────┴────────────┴─────────────────────┴────────────────────┘
```

We see that the solver is filling up each machine with the maximum capacity available. Each machine is also only processing a single job-type. None of job-type D is being processed on any of these machines, interesting. Is that what we actually want? Maybe we want some kind of policy which prioritizes some of the jobs above others? Maybe when work carries over from the previous day, it needs to be prioritized over new work coming in? These are some interesting questions that we will explore in the next post! I hope you are enjoying this series and it is giving you insight into how Mathematical Planning can be used to deal with many different schedulign challenges. More posts to come!